# Introduction

MetaPepView is a metaproteomics dashboard interface designed for visualizing the taxonomic composition and expressed protein functions from microbial community data. In addition, it supports evaluation of metaproteomics experiment performance. It features a user-friendly, web-based interface that can be run locally on desktop PCs. It enables users to perform large scale cross-sample quantitative analysis of taxonomy and protein functions, compare results from database searches and de novo annotations within samples, and evaluate the quality and coverage of metaproteomics experiments and reference databases.

Main features of MetaPepView include:

- Visualization of taxonomic compositions and functional profiles of metaproteomics experiments as obtained from various database search or de novo sequencing engines.
- Perform de novo taxonomy classification using the Unipept API and compare the obtained de novo taxonomic composition with db search results.
- Analyze mass spectrometric performance from mzML raw files and evalute db search and de novo matches from spectral data.
- Benchmark experimental performance with a large number of reference datasets.

## Experiment support
The current version of MetaPepView is designed and has been tested for mass spectrometric raw data obtained from QE Orbitrap mass spectrometers, running in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. For taxonomy and function analysis of communities from metaproteomics data, broad support across mass spectrometry instruments is expected. However, the spectral data analysis toolbox is not designed for data-independent acquisition (DIA) or PASEF based analysis strategies.

## PC requirements
- The dashboard is cross-platform and has been tested in Windows 10/11 and Linux.
- To set up the dashboard server, Docker (or another OCI compliant container manager), should be installed. Alternatively, a python environment may be created from the supplied *requirements.txt* file to run the dashboard directly on the host system.
- A minimum of 16 GB RAM is required for full operation of the dashboard, 32 GB is recommended.
- The dashboard can be accessed through both Firefox (Gecko browser engine) and any Chromium based browser (Chrome, Edge, Brave, etc.).
- Internet connection is required to download taxonomy and function datasets, and for connection to the [Unipept](https://unipept.ugent.be/apidocs) API for de novo taxonomy classification.

!!! note
	The browser engines supports file import up to a certain threshold: (Chromium: ~300 MB, Firefox: ~1GB). Any larger file (which is common in mzML) will not be imported. To enable large file import, it is recommended to compress the files in *.zip* or *.tar.gz* format prior to import. If the mzML file is still too large, smaller mzML files could be generated by setting noise filters (top N signal threshold for example).
