# Preparing input data for MetaPepView
## Metaproteomics data

MetaPepView takes peptide identified scans as input for community processing:

| **Scan** | **Peptide** | **Confidence** | **...** | **Protein id (db search)** |
| -------- | ----------- | -------------- | ------- | -------------------------- |
| 20739    | KVEAATLK    | 87.3           | ...     | *Protein-A*;*Protein-B*    |
| 20313    | KVEAATLK    | 78.5           | ...     | *Protein-A*;*Protein-B*    |
| 21165    | KVEAATLK    | 54.9           | ...     | *Protein-A*;*Protein-B*    |
| 13211    | TSILDAIR    | 79.6           | ...     | *Protein-C*                |
| 13587    | TSILDAIR    | 70.2           | ...     | *Protein-C*                |
| ...      | ...         | ...            | ...     | ...                        |

It supports direct import of peptide identification results from several *db search matching* and *de novo* search tools.

!!! note
    MetaPepView has been tested on Thermo Fisher Scientific Orbitrap Mass spectrometers, where acquisition of spectra has been done in *Data-Dependent Acquisition* (DDA) mode. Support of other MS systems or acquisition modes is not guaranteed. 

### Import db search matching data

Db search matching engines identify peptide sequences from raw mass spectrometry data by matching MS2 spectra against theoretical spectra derived from a user supplied protein sequence database (as fasta). This gives a dataset of scans with matched peptide sequences, and also provides related proteins for each peptide sequence. Through decoy strategies, the *False Discovery Rate* can be calculated and subsequently controlled in the output data. Many search engines do this internally, eliminating the need for pre-filtering during data processing.

The following db search engines are supported in MetaPepView:

- [Sage](https://sage-docs.vercel.app/): MetaPepView supports direct import of the `results.sage.tsv` file generated by Sage.
- [Peaks Studio 10/11](https://www.bioinfor.com/peaks-11/): MetaPepView supports direct import of the `DB search psm.csv` (Peaks Studio 10) or `db.psms.csv` (Peaks Studio 11) export data.
- [MaxQuant](https://www.maxquant.org/): MetaPepView supports direct import of `evidence.txt` file generated by MaxQuant

### Import de novo identification data

De novo search engines identify peptide sequences directly from raw mass spectrometry data without use of a protein sequence database. This enables fast generation of peptide data without minimal preparation of datasets. In addition, it provides a peptide identification method that is unaffected from potential biases that may emerge from the protein sequence database. On the other hand, a lack of spectrum matching decreases the confidence of identified peptide sequences, resulting in much fewer peptide identifications. In addition, there is no robust decoy strategy to estimate the False Discovery Rate from the identified peptides.

The following de novo identification engines are supported in MetaPepView:

- [Novor (SearchGUI)](https://compomics.github.io/projects/searchgui): MetaPepView supports direct import of `XXX.novor.csv` generated from the Novor engine in SearchGUI.
- [Peaks Studio 10/11](https://www.bioinfor.com/peaks-11/): MetaPepView supports direct import of the `de novo peptides.csv` (Peaks Studio 10) or `XXX.denovo.csv` (Peaks Studio 11) export data (`XXX` refers to the project name).

## Annotation data

### Import of taxonomy annotation data

Taxonomy annotation adds taxonomic information to the identified peptides by mapping their corresponding protein id's or their sequence to taxonomy id's (In MetaPepView, the protein id/peptide sequence is referred to as *Accession*). Due to a lack of standardized output formats to match accession to taxonomy, MetaPepView expects a tabular text format (e.g. `csv`, `tsv`, etc.) that provides an accession column that matches the protein id's/peptide sequences from the [[prepare-input-data#Import db search matching data|DB search]] dataset, and a [NCBI](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/taxonomy) or [GTDB](https://gtdb.ecogenomic.org/) format taxonomy id column:

| Protein id  | Taxonomy id (*NCBI*) |
| ----------- | -------------------- |
| *Protein-A* | 562                  |
| *Protein-B* | 550                  |
| *Protein-C* | 4932                 |
| ...         | ...                  |

Alternatively:

| Peptide sequence  | Taxonomy id (*NCBI*) |
| ----------------- | -------------------- |
| KVEAATLK          | 562                  |
| TSILDAIR          | 550                  |
| ...               | ...                  |

Ideally, the dataset should be non-redundant for protein id's/peptide sequences, where every protein id is only present once. However, many alignment tools provide *top n* reporting of matches, causing a single accession to be reported multiple times (often with different taxonomy id's). If there is redundancy in accessions, MetaPepView will resolve the taxonomy id for each accession internally. If different taxonomy id's are given for a single accession, MetaPepView will compute the [Last Common Ancestor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Most_recent_common_ancestor) taxonomy id to which all reported taxonomies are descended from. However, if the dataset is large and has strong redundancy, this may take some time to resolve.  

The standard format that it expects is a `tsv` file (delimiter `\t`) with **protein id** as the first column (Accession column index `0`) and taxonomy id as second column (Taxonomy column index `1`). However, MetaPepView provides several options to read different formatted map files, as shown in [[data-import#Taxonomy annotation|Data Import section]].

There are several options to customize the taxonomy annotation dataset. Annotation may be done by protein id mapping or peptide sequence mapping, column indices for accession and taxonomy may be customized, and a regex pattern may be given to take only a pattern from the accession (useful if a prefix needs to be removed).

In addition, MetaPepView can process either *taxonomy id's*, or *taxonomy names* in the input dataset. However, it is strongly recommended to match accessions to taxonomy id's; In NCBI, one taxonomy id may be assigned multiple taxonomy names (aliases), or multiple taxonomy id's may share identical taxonomy names. On the other hand, a taxonomy id will always represent a unique taxonomy group.


#### How to obtain accession-taxonomy map dataset

Taxonomy information from protein id's may be obtained from the Uniprot database. Here, taxonomy id's are easily linked to protein id from the fasta header:

**UniprotKB format:** (Taxonomy id in `OX=...` field)
```fasta
>sp|P0A796|PFKA_ECOLI ATP-dependent 6-phosphofructokinase isozyme 1 OS=Escherichia coli (strain K12) OX=83333 GN=pfkA PE=1 SV=1
MIKKIGVLTSGGDAPGMNAAIRGVVRSALTEGLEVMGIYDGYLGLYEDRMVQLDRYSVSD
MINRGGTFLGSARFPEFRDENIRAVAIENLKKRGIDALVVIGGDGSYMGAMRLTEMGFPC
IGLPGTIDNDIKGTDYTIGFFTALSTVVEAIDRLRDTSSSHQRISVVEVMGRYCGDLTLA
AAIAGGCEFVVVPEVEFSREDLVNEIKAGIAKGKKHAIVAITEHMCDVDELAHFIEKETG
RETRATVLGHIQRGGSPVPYDRILASRMGAYAIDLLLAGYGGRCVGIQNEQLVHHDIIDA
IENMKRPFKGDWLDCAKKLY
```

**Uniref format:** (Taxonomy id in `TaxID=...` field)
```fasta
>UniRef100_A0A143Q7I6 ATP-dependent 6-phosphofructokinase isozyme 2 n=1 Tax=Rhodococcus sp. PBTS 1 TaxID=1653478 RepID=A0A143Q7I6_9NOCA
MILTLTANPSMDRTVTLDAALQRGAVHRATTTTTDPGGKGVNVARVLTAAGRPCTAVLPG
TGSDPLLGALGALGVRYHAVPTTGLARTNLTVSEPDGTTTKINEPGTALAPETVAGLTAS
VRELAQRAQWVVLSGSVPPGVDAGWYGDLVAAVRETSARVAVDTSDAPLLALAAGFPRTA
PDLIKPNAEELGQLTGRDGEVLEHAAAQGDPMPTVEAARILVDRGVGAVLATLGASGAVL
VTATGAWFATPPPITPRSTVGAGDSSLAGYVLADLDGADGAGRLARAVAYGSAAAALPGT
RLPTPTDVHVDAVPVRSLSLPGSSALARHTS
```

If [[prepare-input-data#Import db search matching data|DB search matching]] is done with a Uniprot/Uniref header formatted fasta file as protein sequence database, a accession-taxonomy-map dataset (using protein id's) is easily created by a single command using the `sed` tool in *Bash* (Only available in Linux):

```Bash
# Converts UniprotKB formatted fasta to protein-taxonomy map tsv file
sed -rn "s/>(\S+).+OX=([0-9]+).*$/\1\t\2/p" <uniprot_data.fasta >./prot_to_tax.tsv
```

```Bash
# Converts Uniref formatted fasta to protein-taxonomy map tsv file
sed -rn "s/>(\S+).+TaxID=([0-9]+).*$/\1\t\2/p" <uniref_data.fasta >./prot_to_tax.tsv
```

On the other hand, if a protein sequence database was derived from a metagenome, or from another unannotated source, the proteins should be aligned against the Uniprot/Uniref database first. It is recommended to perform alignment with [Diamond](https://github.com/bbuchfink/diamond) against the full [UniprotKB (Swiss-Prot + TrEMBL)](https://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/complete/) or the full [Uniref100](https://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/uniref/uniref100/) database. After annotation, Diamond provides an output file that maps protein id's to Uniprot/Uniref id's. These can be converted into the accession-taxonomy map dataset for MetaPepView.

#### Taxonomy annotation in GTDB format

The Genome Taxonomy Database provides an alternative phylogenetic tree to classify bacteria and archaea. While it does not cover the complete tree of life (Eukaryota are absent), it provides a more consistent dataset compared to NCBI taxonomy. For example, phylogenetic classification is based on sequence identity distances between organisms. Also, the full dataset consists only of sequences with genome representation.

Providing GTDB taxonomy annotation to protein id's is more challenging. GTDB does provide a  [full protein sequence dataset](https://data.gtdb.ecogenomic.org/releases/latest/genomic_files_reps/). However, the dataset is packaged as separate genome grouped fasta files. These have to be manually linked into a single protein sequence dataset. In addition, the proteins only provide NCBI genome id's (For example: `GCA_034132005.1`) in the header. MetaPepView is able to match these genome id's to GTDB taxonomy id's. Therefore, the GTDB protein fasta can be used as alignment database in Diamond. From the output, protein data is matched against the genome id and a accession-taxonomy map can be constructed.

### Functional annotation

The functional annotation dataset adds functional information to peptide sequences from [[prepare-input-data#Import db search matching data|DB search]] data. This can be used to quantify expression of various functional protein groups from the dataset, or to export functional expression pathways. MetaPepView uses the KEGG functional annotation format to assign functional information to peptides.

MetaPepView supports direct import of output from two common functional annotation tools: 

- [EggNOG](http://eggnog5.embl.de/#/app/home): MetaPepView supports direct import of the `XXX.emapper.annotations` output file (`XXX` refers to a user specified prefix).
- [GhostKOALA](https://www.kegg.jp/ghostkoala/): MetaPepView supports direct import of the `XXX_gKOALA.tsv` output file (`XXX` refers to a user specified prefix)

## Spectral datasets

For evaluation of metaproteomics experiments, MetaPepView provides a module for visualization and analysis of spectral mass spectrometry data. For this, MetaPepView expects spectral data in *mzML* format.

### Spectral data (mzML)

*mzML* is a human and machine readable format that can be derived from several raw spectral data formats (from mass spectrometers by ThermoFisher, Bruker, *etc.*). It contains all the observed signals measured in the MS, several additional parameters and properties for each MS scan, and metadata related to the MS run. 

!!! note
    For spectral data analysis, MetaPepView is designed for analysis of *Data-Dependent Acquisition* (DDA) MS experiments, and has been tested on QE Orbitrap mass spectrometers. Any spectral data from DDA tandem MS experiments should work. However, *Data-Independent Acquisition* (DIA) experiments may not be processed properly in MetaPepView.

The recommended method to generate mzML data is by using the tool *MSConvert*, provided by [ProteoWizard](https://proteowizard.sourceforge.io/download.html). Peak picking on MS level 1 - 2 should be enabled for mzML generation. Peaks may be compressed with *zlib*.

!!! note
    The browser MetaPepView is displayed in has a file size limit, above which no file import is possible. For Chromium browsers, this size is **~300 MB** while Firefox allows **~500 MB** sizes. To decrease the file size, MetaPepView can work with *zip* or *tar.gz* compressed files (mzML file should be the only file in the archive). This should allow import of large MS runs into the dashboard. In the case that the file size is still too large, the mzML file can be shrunk further by setting a *peak threshold*. By limiting the peak threshold to the 100-200 most intense peaks, great size reduction is reached with minimal loss of valuable information.

### Feature data (featureXML)

Several spectral quality metrics rely on the grouping of raw MS signals into *features*. Features are the cluster of all peaks (all isotopes measured over subsequent scans) that represent a single molecule. From a feature, several properties may be retrieved: the elution time (Peak width), molecule charge, as well as feature intensity. For feature data, MetaPepView expects a separate dataset in parallel to the mzML data in *featureXML* format. Feature data in this format can be generated by the [OpenMS](https://openms.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) platform.

To generate a feature dataset, the *FeatureFinderCentroided* function provided by OpenMS is used. Installation of OpenMS is described in the documentation (see OpenMS link above). For Linux (Ubuntu), OpenMS can be easily installed from the *apt* package manager:

```Bash
$ sudo apt install OpenMS
```

When OpenMS is installed, a feature map in *featureXML* format can be generated by running:

```Bash
$ FeatureFinderCentroided -in example.mzML -out example.featureXML
```
